In May 2018, we collected litter from Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge in Madison, IN, USA (38.965630, -85.364500) and transported it to the University of Florida in Gainesville, FL, USA. Microstegium vimineum has a mixed mating system of cleistogamous (obligately selfed, within leaf sheaths) and chasmogamous (potentially outcrossed, open) seeds (Baker and Dyer 2011). To minimize germination of cleistogamous seeds, we hand-picked them along with any non-M. vimineum material from the litter. We created three litter treatments within the range of litter observed at BONWR (Appendix S1): 0.91 g/pot (50 g/m2, “low”), 1.82 g/pot (100 g/m2, “medium”), 3.64 g/pot (200 g/m2, “high”), and a control treatment without litter (“none”). To enhance sporulation of pathogenic fungi in the litter, we incubated the litter for 56 hours at room temperature in one-gallon plastic bags with a paper towel saturated with deionized water. We collected M. vimineum seeds from BONWR in fall 2015 and purchased E. virginicus seeds from Prairie Moon Nursery (Winona, MN, USA) in spring 2018. On June 15, 2018, we planted three treatments: 50 seeds of E. virginicus, 50 seeds of M. vimineum (both “alone”; i.e., intraspecific competition), and 50 seeds of each (“in competition”; i.e., inter- and intraspecific competition), into 1 L (15.2 cm diameter) plastic pots filled with Metromix 930 growing medium (Sungro Horticulture, Agawam, MA, USA) saturated with tap water. We added the litter treatments to pots, creating twelve treatments (four litter treatments crossed with three planting treatments) with six replicates each. The following day, we topped each pot with a clear plastic sheet (50.8 cm width, 17.8 cm height; 0.005 Grafix Dura-Lar® film, Maple Heights, OH) formed into a cone to increase humidity and potentially enhance fungal sporulation. Cones were opened to cylinders as plants outgrew them. We placed pots under shade tents in the greenhouse to reduce heat stress (photosynthetically active radiation: 224 µMolm-2s-1 +/- 18 µMol m-2s-1), haphazardly rearranged them across two greenhouse benches weekly, and watered them daily. To measure establishment, we counted the number of plants per pot, and to measure disease incidence, we counted the proportion of plants per pot with at least two foliar lesions. We measured establishment and disease incidence weekly for six weeks. Some M. vimineum seedlings grew in E. virginicus-only pots, likely from cleistogamous seeds left in the litter despite our attempts to remove them. We counted and removed these seedlings. After 10 weeks, we cut plant stems at the soil surface and stored each species from each pot in a separate paper bag at 4°C. We then counted the number of M. vimineum plants and E. virginicus tillers (individuals were not identifiable) per pot, and the proportion with two or more foliar lesions. Because M. vimineum had few lesions, we searched for a maximum of ten minutes per M. vimineum per pot. Plants were then oven-dried at 60°C to a constant mass and weighed.

Data files and code referring to AppS3 correspond to a second experiment that is presented in Appendix S3 of the manuscript. We performed a greenhouse experiment to test the effects of moisture on litter-induced disease of Microstegium vimineum and to assess the potential for Microstegium litter to promote disease symptoms on five native species: Calamagrostis canadensis, Dichanthelium clandestinum, Elymus virginicus, Eragrostis trichodes, and Glyceria striata. We refer to each species by its genus for the remainder of the Methods. We purchased seeds of Calamagrostis, Elymus, Eragrostis, and Glyceria from Prairie Moon Nursery (Winona, MN, USA) in spring 2018 and we purchased Dichanthelium seeds from Sheffield’s Seed Company (Locke, NY, USA) in spring 2018. The Microstegium seeds and litter were collected from Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge (Madison, IN, USA), as described above. Additional litter was collected from the same field site in June 2018 and homogenized with the litter collected in May 2018. In contrast with the experiment described in the main text, we did not remove non¬-Microstegium litter or cleistogamous Microstegium seeds from the litter. Seeds and litter were stored at 4℃ until the start of the experiment. The experimental design included five replicate pots for each treatment. There were three treatments for Microstegium—no litter, litter with low moisture, and litter with high moisture—and two treatments for the native species—no litter and litter with high moisture. We planted each species in its own pot (1 L, 6 in. diameter) using Metromix 360 growing medium (Sungro Horticulture, Agawam, MA, USA) saturated with tap water. We used data from a pilot experiment to determine how many seeds to add for each species and when to plant them so that they would be approximately the same height and density when litter was added to the pots. This goal was motivated by the assumption that plant height and density affect the distance fungal spores must travel from litter to live plants for disease transmission to occur. We planted 60 Glyceria seeds per pot 24 days prior to litter addition. We planted 1000 Calamagrostis seeds, 80 Dichanthelium seeds, 60 Elymus seeds, 80 Eragrostis seeds, and 40 Microstegium seeds per pot 20 days prior to litter addition. Approximately seven days post planting, we thinned Elymus and Microstegium pots to 20–25 individuals each. Calamagrostis and Glyceria pots were thinned to space out individuals and the other two native species were not thinned. On July 26, 2018, we filled one-gallon plastic bags with 9.5 g of Microstegium litter and three paper towels saturated with deionized water (one bag per experimental pot). We stored the bags in a growth chamber at 24°C and a 16/8-hour light/dark cycle for 89.5 hours prior to being added to experiment pots. Bags were checked daily and water was added as needed. We measured the heights of five plants per pot from the soil surface in the 24 hours leading up to litter addition. We attached 13 in. x 20 in. clear plastic cylindrical humidity chambers (material described above) around each pot. Just prior to adding litter to pots with the high moisture treatment, we misted plants with tap water for five seconds. We poured the litter from each plastic bag onto a pot, added tap water to the empty bag, shook it, and poured it on the pot. For the high moisture treatment, we misted plants with tap water for five seconds after litter had been added to all pots and two more times afterwards at two-hour intervals. High moisture pots were then misted every two hours and low moisture pots were misted once per day for the second and third days from 9:30 AM to 1:30 PM. We recorded whether water droplets were observed on leaf surfaces in the litter addition treatments ten times over the first 45 hours of the experiment. In the first 19.4 hours, pots with any water droplets were recorded, but after this time, pots were only recorded as having water droplets if droplets were observed on at least three leaves. On September 13, 2018, plant stems were clipped at the soil surface with scissors and stored at 4°oC in paper bags. Over the following month, we examined plants for foliar lesions for one minute per bag or until lesions were found. Pots were considered infected if at least two brown lesions were observed on leaf surfaces. Black spots were observed but were not counted as lesions. Because Microstegium germinated from cleistogamous seeds in the litter, we also noted whether lesions were observed on their leaf surfaces.
